mailadm: adding and purging e-mail accounts as a service
========================================================

mailadm is a simple administration command lihne tool for creating and
purging e-mail accounts in Dovecot/Postfix installations that work with
text files.  Mailadm can be run as a web app that allows remote creation
of e-mail accounts, based on using secret tokens.  On the server you
can configure multiple tokens

The development repository is at

    https://github.com/deltachat/mailadm


Installing and Configuring the command line
-------------------------------------------

Assumptions used in this doc:

- you are using `dovecot` as MDA (mail delivery agent)
  and `postfix` as MTA (mail transport agent)
  and have a working setup of both, including proper SSL setup.

- You have Python and python-virtualenv installed.

- You have a `mailadm` user with a dedicated home directory
  under which the mailadm software is installed and all
  mailadm token/user state is managed. The `mailadm` user
  needs to be part of the `vmail` group used for storing
  and deleting user mail.

- You have a `vmail` user with a home directory that keeps all virtual
  users and their mailstate. Both `mailadm` and `dovecot` will
  write or delete files there.



installing mailadm
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Create a user account "mailadm" and login/su to this user.
Then create and activate a Python virtualenv and install mailadm::

    # go to mailadm home directory (mailadm user needs to exist!)
    cd ~mailadm

    # create virtual python environment and install latest stable mailadm
    python3 -m venv venv
    venv/bin/pip install -q mailadm

    # activate venv and set config location
    echo "source ~/venv/bin/activate venv" >> .bashrc
    echo "export MAILADM_CFG=\$HOME/mailadm.cfg" >> .bashrc

Now do `source $HOME/.bashrc` so you have the new settings.


mailadm configuration file
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The mailadm configuration specifies where system file
locations and the mailadm database are to be found.
The configuration file can contain values that use `$VAR` environment
variable expansion in bash-style::

    # content of /home/mailadm/mailadm.cfg
    [sysconfig]

    # path to mailadm-owned token/user authentication database
    # dovecot queries this database for authenticating
    # and for getting userdb-configuration.
    path_mailadm_db = $HOME/mailadm.db

    # path to postfix map that is generated by mailadm
    path_virtual_mailboxes = $HOME/virtual_mailboxes

    # user und which dovecot delivers virtual mail
    vmail_user = vmail

    # the externally visible web endpoint for creating new emails
    web_endpoint = https://example.org/new_email

    # the mail domain for which mailadm creates e-mail addresses
    mail_domain = example.org


Permissions mailadm, dovecot, vmail
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Both mailadm web, prune and command line tools execute as the user
`mailadm` and do never require root privileges. `mailadm prune` purges
user data and thus needs to have write-permission to `vmail` directories.
You typically need to add the `vmail` group for the `mailadm` user.

Adding a first token and user
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

With the `MAILADM_CFG` environment variable
pointing to your `mailadm.cfg` file above,
you can now add a first "token"::

    $ mailadm add-token oneday --expiry 1d --prefix="tmp."
    DB: Creating schema /home/mailadm/mailadm.db
    added token 'oneday'
    token:oneday
      prefix = tmp.
      expiry = 1d
      maxuse = 50
      usecount = 0
      token  = 1d_r84EW3N8hEKk
      http://localhost:3961/new_email?t=1d_r84EW3N8hEKk&n=oneday
      DCACCOUNT:http://localhost:3961/new_email?t=1d_r84EW3N8hEKk&n=oneday

and then we can add a user (which will automatically use the token
because the email addresses matches the prefix)::

    $ mailadm add-user tmp.12345@example.org
    added addr 'tmp.12345@example.org' with token 'oneday'
    wrote /home/mailadm/virtual_mailboxes

When adding/manipulating users `mailadm` writes out
virtual mailbox "map" files (including the ".db" form)
so that Postfix knows which mailadm mailboxes exist.


Integrate with system services
------------------------------

Once you have a `mailadm.cfg` file you can generate some
config files and fragments which you can integrate
with your postfix/dovecot setup::

    $ mailadm gen-sysconfig


integration with dovecot
++++++++++++++++++++++++

We integrate mailadm managed users with dovecot
by making dovecot query our `mailadm.db`::


Now we need to include this file from the `/etc/dovecot/conf.d/10-auth.conf` file
by adding the following line::

    !include auth-mailadm.conf.ext

With these two dovecot related files added/modified we can reload dovecot::

    systemctl reload dovecot


Integration with postfix
++++++++++++++++++++++++

You need to already have configured a "virtual mailboxes" setup with postfix.
Also, the `mail_domain` in the `mailadm.cfg` file needs to point
to the domain which postfix serves.

To let postfix know about mailadm-managed users, add the
mailadm-generated `postfix-users` file to postfix configuration::

    # add this into your existing and working /etc/postfix/main.cf
    virtual_mailbox_maps =
        hash:/home/mailadm/postfix-users


Testing the web app
-----------------------------

Let's find out the URL again for creating new users::

    $ mailadm list-tokens
    token:oneday
      prefix = tmp.
      expiry = 1d
      maxuse = 50
      usecount = 1
      token  = 1d_r84EW3N8hEKk
      http://localhost:3961/?t=1d_r84EW3N8hEKk&n=oneday
      DCACCOUNT:http://localhost:3961/new_email?t=1d_r84EW3N8hEKk&n=oneday

The second last line is the one we can use with curl::

   $ curl -X POST 'http://localhost:3961/?t=1d_r84EW3N8hEKk&n=oneday'
   {"email":"tmp.km5y5@example.org","expiry":"1d","password":"cg8VL5f0jH2U","ttl":86400}

We got an e-mail account through the web API, nice.

Note that we are using a localhost-url.  Let's see how
we could configure "nginx" to serve our web app.


nginx configuration
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

We assume here that you:

- have HTTPS working for your web domain

- have an operational postfix/dovecot configuration for the domain
  configured by `mail_domain`

- mailadm is running as a service and dovecot and postfix are using its files.

To make the web API available you can configure nginx
to proxy to the localhost app::

    # add these lines to your nginx-site config
    # (/etc/nginx/sites-enabled/XXX)
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://localhost:3961/;
    }

Note that if you change the `location /` parameter you need to edit
the `mailadm.cfg` file and modify the `web_endpoint` value accordingly
and then restart the mailadm service.


Purging old accounts
++++++++++++++++++++++++

The `mailadm purge` command will remove accounts
including the home directories of expired users.
You can call it from a "cron.daily" script.

Purging old accounts
++++++++++++++++++++++++

The `mailadm purge` command will remove accounts
including the home directories of expired users.
You can call it from a "cron.daily" script.



Bonus: QR code generation
---------------------------

Once you have mailadm configured and integrated with
nginx, postfix and dovecot you can generate a QR code:

    $ mailadm gen-qr oneday
    dcaccount-testrun.org-oneday.png written for token 'oneday'

You can print or hand out this QR code file and people can scan it with
their Delta Chat to get a oneday "burner" account.

